doc/source/whatsnew/v1.1.0.rst, before:

.. _whatsnew_110:

What's new in 1.1.0 (??)
------------------------

These are the changes in pandas 1.1.0. See :ref:`release` for a full changelog
including other versions of pandas.

{{ header }}

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_110.period_index_partial_string_slicing:

Nonmonotonic PeriodIndex Partial String Slicing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`PeriodIndex` now supports partial string slicing for non-monotonic indexes, mirroring :class:`DatetimeIndex` behavior (:issue:`31096`)

For example:

.. ipython:: python

   dti = pd.date_range("2014-01-01", periods=30, freq="30D")
   pi = dti.to_period("D")
   ser_monotonic = pd.Series(np.arange(30), index=pi)
   shuffler = list(range(0, 30, 2)) + list(range(1, 31, 2))
   ser = ser_monotonic[shuffler]
   ser

.. ipython:: python

   ser["2014"]
   ser.loc["May 2015"]

.. _whatsnew_110.timestamp_fold_support:

Fold argument support in Timestamp constructor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`Timestamp:` now supports the keyword-only fold argument according to `PEP 495 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0495/#the-fold-attribute>`_ similar to parent ``datetime.datetime`` class. It supports both accepting fold as an initialization argument and inferring fold from other constructor arguments (:issue:`25057`, :issue:`31338`). Support is limited to ``dateutil`` timezones as ``pytz`` doesn't support fold.

For example:

.. ipython:: python

    ts = pd.Timestamp("2019-10-27 01:30:00+00:00")
    ts.fold

.. ipython:: python

    ts = pd.Timestamp(year=2019, month=10, day=27, hour=1, minute=30,
                      tz="dateutil/Europe/London", fold=1)
    ts

For more on working with fold, see :ref:`Fold subsection <timeseries.fold>` in the user guide.

.. _whatsnew_110.enhancements.other:

Other enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- :class:`Styler` may now render CSS more efficiently where multiple cells have the same styling (:issue:`30876`)
- :meth:`Styler.highlight_null` now accepts ``subset`` argument (:issue:`31345`)
- When writing directly to a sqlite connection :func:`to_sql` now supports the ``multi`` method (:issue:`29921`)
- `OptionError` is now exposed in `pandas.errors` (:issue:`27553`)
- :func:`timedelta_range` will now infer a frequency when passed ``start``, ``stop``, and ``periods`` (:issue:`32377`)
- Positional slicing on a :class:`IntervalIndex` now supports slices with ``step > 1`` (:issue:`31658`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.sample` will now also allow array-like and BitGenerator objects to be passed to ``random_state`` as seeds (:issue:`32503`)
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.api.other:

Other API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- :meth:`Series.describe` will now show distribution percentiles for ``datetime`` dtypes, statistics ``first`` and ``last``
  will now be ``min`` and ``max`` to match with numeric dtypes in :meth:`DataFrame.describe` (:issue:`30164`)
- Added :meth:`DataFrame.value_counts` (:issue:`5377`)
- :meth:`Groupby.groups` now returns an abbreviated representation when called on large dataframes (:issue:`1135`)
- ``loc`` lookups with an object-dtype :class:`Index` and an integer key will now raise ``KeyError`` instead of ``TypeError`` when key is missing (:issue:`31905`)
-

Backwards incompatible API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- :meth:`DataFrame.swaplevels` now raises a  ``TypeError`` if the axis is not a :class:`MultiIndex`.
  Previously a ``AttributeError`` was raised (:issue:`31126`)
- :meth:`DataFrameGroupby.mean` and :meth:`SeriesGroupby.mean` (and similarly for :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.median`, :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.std` and :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.var`)
  now raise a  ``TypeError`` if a not-accepted keyword argument is passed into it.
  Previously a ``UnsupportedFunctionCall`` was raised (``AssertionError`` if ``min_count`` passed into :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.median`) (:issue:`31485`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.at` and :meth:`Series.at` will raise a ``TypeError`` instead of a ``ValueError`` if an incompatible key is passed, and ``KeyError`` if a missing key is passed, matching the behavior of ``.loc[]`` (:issue:`31722`)
- Passing an integer dtype other than ``int64`` to ``np.array(period_index, dtype=...)`` will now raise ``TypeError`` instead of incorrectly using ``int64`` (:issue:`32255`)
-

.. _whatsnew_110.api_breaking.indexing_raises_key_errors:

Failed Label-Based Lookups Always Raise KeyError
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Label lookups ``series[key]``, ``series.loc[key]`` and ``frame.loc[key]``
used to raises either ``KeyError`` or ``TypeError`` depending on the type of
key and type of :class:`Index`.  These now consistently raise ``KeyError`` (:issue:`31867`)

.. ipython:: python

    ser1 = pd.Series(range(3), index=[0, 1, 2])
    ser2 = pd.Series(range(3), index=pd.date_range("2020-02-01", periods=3))

*Previous behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: ser1[1.5]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on Int64Index with these indexers [1.5] of type float

    In [4] ser1["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [5]: ser1.loc[1.5]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on Int64Index with these indexers [1.5] of type float

    In [6]: ser1.loc["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [7]: ser2.loc[1]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on DatetimeIndex with these indexers [1] of type int

    In [8]: ser2.loc[pd.Timestamp(0)]
    ...
    KeyError: Timestamp('1970-01-01 00:00:00')

*New behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: ser1[1.5]
    ...
    KeyError: 1.5

    In [4] ser1["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [5]: ser1.loc[1.5]
    ...
    KeyError: 1.5

    In [6]: ser1.loc["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [7]: ser2.loc[1]
    ...
    KeyError: 1

    In [8]: ser2.loc[pd.Timestamp(0)]
    ...
    KeyError: Timestamp('1970-01-01 00:00:00')

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.api_breaking.assignment_to_multiple_columns:

Assignment to multiple columns of a DataFrame when some columns do not exist
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Assignment to multiple columns of a :class:`DataFrame` when some of the columns do not exist would previously assign the values to the last column. Now, new columns would be constructed with the right values. (:issue:`13658`)

.. ipython:: python

   df = pd.DataFrame({'a': [0, 1, 2], 'b': [3, 4, 5]})
   df

*Previous behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

   In [3]: df[['a', 'c']] = 1
   In [4]: df
   Out[4]:
      a  b
   0  1  1
   1  1  1
   2  1  1

*New behavior*:

.. ipython:: python

   df[['a', 'c']] = 1
   df

.. _whatsnew_110.deprecations:

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Lookups on a :class:`Series` with a single-item list containing a slice (e.g. ``ser[[slice(0, 4)]]``) are deprecated, will raise in a future version.  Either convert the list to tuple, or pass the slice directly instead (:issue:`31333`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.mean` and :meth:`DataFrame.median` with ``numeric_only=None`` will include datetime64 and datetime64tz columns in a future version (:issue:`29941`)
- Setting values with ``.loc`` using a positional slice is deprecated and will raise in a future version.  Use ``.loc`` with labels or ``.iloc`` with positions instead (:issue:`31840`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.to_dict` has deprecated accepting short names for ``orient`` in future versions (:issue:`32515`)
- :meth:`Categorical.to_dense` is deprecated and will be removed in a future version, use ``np.asarray(cat)`` instead (:issue:`32639`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------


.. _whatsnew_110.performance:

Performance improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Performance improvement in :class:`Timedelta` constructor (:issue:`30543`)
- Performance improvement in :class:`Timestamp` constructor (:issue:`30543`)
- Performance improvement in flex arithmetic ops between :class:`DataFrame` and :class:`Series` with ``axis=0`` (:issue:`31296`)
- The internal index method :meth:`~Index._shallow_copy` now copies cached attributes over to the new index,
  avoiding creating these again on the new index. This can speed up many operations that depend on creating copies of
  existing indexes (:issue:`28584`, :issue:`32640`, :issue:`32669`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.bug_fixes:

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~


Categorical
^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug where :func:`merge` was unable to join on non-unique categorical indices (:issue:`28189`)
- Bug when passing categorical data to :class:`Index` constructor along with ``dtype=object`` incorrectly returning a :class:`CategoricalIndex` instead of object-dtype :class:`Index` (:issue:`32167`)
- Bug where :class:`Categorical` comparison operator ``__ne__`` would incorrectly evaluate to ``False`` when either element was missing (:issue:`32276`)
- :meth:`Categorical.fillna` now accepts :class:`Categorical` ``other`` argument (:issue:`32420`)

Datetimelike
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in :class:`Timestamp` where constructing :class:`Timestamp` from ambiguous epoch time and calling constructor again changed :meth:`Timestamp.value` property (:issue:`24329`)
- :meth:`DatetimeArray.searchsorted`, :meth:`TimedeltaArray.searchsorted`, :meth:`PeriodArray.searchsorted` not recognizing non-pandas scalars and incorrectly raising ``ValueError`` instead of ``TypeError`` (:issue:`30950`)
- Bug in :class:`Timestamp` where constructing :class:`Timestamp` with dateutil timezone less than 128 nanoseconds before daylight saving time switch from winter to summer would result in nonexistent time (:issue:`31043`)
- Bug in :meth:`Period.to_timestamp`, :meth:`Period.start_time` with microsecond frequency returning a timestamp one nanosecond earlier than the correct time (:issue:`31475`)
- :class:`Timestamp` raising confusing error message when year, month or day is missing (:issue:`31200`)
- Bug in :class:`DatetimeIndex` constructor incorrectly accepting ``bool``-dtyped inputs (:issue:`32668`)

Timedelta
^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in constructing a :class:`Timedelta` with a high precision integer that would round the :class:`Timedelta` components (:issue:`31354`)
- Bug in dividing ``np.nan`` or ``None`` by :class:`Timedelta`` incorrectly returning ``NaT`` (:issue:`31869`)
-

Timezones
^^^^^^^^^

-
-


Numeric
^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.floordiv` with ``axis=0`` not treating division-by-zero like :meth:`Series.floordiv` (:issue:`31271`)
- Bug in :meth:`to_numeric` with string argument ``"uint64"`` and ``errors="coerce"`` silently fails (:issue:`32394`)
- Bug in :meth:`to_numeric` with ``downcast="unsigned"`` fails for empty data (:issue:`32493`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.mean` with ``numeric_only=False`` and either ``datetime64`` dtype or ``PeriodDtype`` column incorrectly raising ``TypeError`` (:issue:`32426`)
-

Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :class:`Series` construction from NumPy array with big-endian ``datetime64`` dtype (:issue:`29684`)
- Bug in :class:`Timedelta` construction with large nanoseconds keyword value (:issue:`32402`)
- Bug in :class:`DataFrame` construction where sets would be duplicated rather than raising (:issue:`32582`)

Strings
^^^^^^^

-
-


Interval
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Indexing
^^^^^^^^
- Bug in slicing on a :class:`DatetimeIndex` with a partial-timestamp dropping high-resolution indices near the end of a year, quarter, or month (:issue:`31064`)
- Bug in :meth:`PeriodIndex.get_loc` treating higher-resolution strings differently from :meth:`PeriodIndex.get_value` (:issue:`31172`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.at` and :meth:`DataFrame.at` not matching ``.loc`` behavior when looking up an integer in a :class:`Float64Index` (:issue:`31329`)
- Bug in :meth:`PeriodIndex.is_monotonic` incorrectly returning ``True`` when containing leading ``NaT`` entries (:issue:`31437`)
- Bug in :meth:`DatetimeIndex.get_loc` raising ``KeyError`` with converted-integer key instead of the user-passed key (:issue:`31425`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.xs` incorrectly returning ``Timestamp`` instead of ``datetime64`` in some object-dtype cases (:issue:`31630`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.iat` incorrectly returning ``Timestamp`` instead of ``datetime`` in some object-dtype cases (:issue:`32809`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.loc` and :meth:`DataFrame.loc` when indexing with an integer key on a object-dtype :class:`Index` that is not all-integers (:issue:`31905`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.iloc.__setitem__` on a :class:`DataFrame` with duplicate columns incorrectly setting values for all matching columns (:issue:`15686`, :issue:`22036`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.loc:` and :meth:`Series.loc` with a :class:`DatetimeIndex`, :class:`TimedeltaIndex`, or :class:`PeriodIndex` incorrectly allowing lookups of non-matching datetime-like dtypes (:issue:`32650`)

Missing
^^^^^^^

- Calling :meth:`fillna` on an empty Series now correctly returns a shallow copied object. The behaviour is now consistent with :class:`Index`, :class:`DataFrame` and a non-empty :class:`Series` (:issue:`32543`).


MultiIndex
^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`Dataframe.loc` when used with a :class:`MultiIndex`. The returned values were not in the same order as the given inputs (:issue:`22797`)

.. ipython:: python

        df = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(4),
                          index=[["a", "a", "b", "b"], [1, 2, 1, 2]])
        # Rows are now ordered as the requested keys
        df.loc[(['b', 'a'], [2, 1]), :]

- Bug in :meth:`MultiIndex.intersection` was not guaranteed to preserve order when ``sort=False``. (:issue:`31325`)

.. ipython:: python

        left = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["b", "a"], [2, 1]])
        right = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["a", "b", "c"], [1, 2, 3]])
        # Common elements are now guaranteed to be ordered by the left side
        left.intersection(right, sort=False)

-

I/O
^^^
- Bug in :meth:`read_json` where integer overflow was occuring when json contains big number strings. (:issue:`30320`)
- `read_csv` will now raise a ``ValueError`` when the arguments `header` and `prefix` both are not `None`. (:issue:`27394`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_json` was raising ``NotFoundError`` when ``path_or_buf`` was an S3 URI (:issue:`28375`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_parquet` overwriting pyarrow's default for
  ``coerce_timestamps``; following pyarrow's default allows writing nanosecond
  timestamps with ``version="2.0"`` (:issue:`31652`).
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was raising `TypeError` when `sep=None` was used in combination with `comment` keyword (:issue:`31396`)
- Bug in :class:`HDFStore` that caused it to set to ``int64`` the dtype of a ``datetime64`` column when reading a DataFrame in Python 3 from fixed format written in Python 2 (:issue:`31750`)
- :func:`read_csv` will raise a ``ValueError`` when the column names passed in `parse_dates` are missing in the Dataframe (:issue:`31251`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_excel` where a UTF-8 string with a high surrogate would cause a segmentation violation (:issue:`23809`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was causing a file descriptor leak on an empty file (:issue:`31488`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was causing a segfault when there were blank lines between the header and data rows (:issue:`28071`)


Plotting
^^^^^^^^

- :func:`.plot` for line/bar now accepts color by dictonary (:issue:`8193`).
-
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.boxplot` and :meth:`DataFrame.plot.boxplot` lost color attributes of ``medianprops``, ``whiskerprops``, ``capprops`` and ``medianprops`` (:issue:`30346`)


Groupby/resample/rolling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in :meth:`GroupBy.apply` raises ``ValueError`` when the ``by`` axis is not sorted and has duplicates and the applied ``func`` does not mutate passed in objects (:issue:`30667`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrameGroupby.transform` produces incorrect result with transformation functions (:issue:`30918`)

Reshaping
^^^^^^^^^

- Bug effecting all numeric and boolean reduction methods not returning subclassed data type. (:issue:`25596`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` when only MultiIndexed columns is set (:issue:`17038`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.unstack` and :meth:`Series.unstack` can take tuple names in MultiIndexed data (:issue:`19966`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` when ``margin`` is ``True`` and only ``column`` is defined (:issue:`31016`)
- Fix incorrect error message in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot` when ``columns`` is set to ``None``. (:issue:`30924`)
- Bug in :func:`crosstab` when inputs are two Series and have tuple names, the output will keep dummy MultiIndex as columns. (:issue:`18321`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.pivot` can now take lists for ``index`` and ``columns`` arguments (:issue:`21425`)
- Bug in :func:`concat` where the resulting indices are not copied when ``copy=True`` (:issue:`29879`)
- :meth:`Series.append` will now raise a ``TypeError`` when passed a DataFrame or a sequence containing Dataframe (:issue:`31413`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.replace` and :meth:`Series.replace` will raise a ``TypeError`` if ``to_replace`` is not an expected type. Previously the ``replace`` would fail silently (:issue:`18634`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.apply` where callback was called with :class:`Series` parameter even though ``raw=True`` requested. (:issue:`32423`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` losing timezone information when creating a :class:`MultiIndex` level from a column with timezone-aware dtype (:issue:`32558`)


Sparse
^^^^^^
- Creating a :class:`SparseArray` from timezone-aware dtype will issue a warning before dropping timezone information, instead of doing so silently (:issue:`32501`)
-
-

ExtensionArray
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-
-


Other
^^^^^
- Appending a dictionary to a :class:`DataFrame` without passing ``ignore_index=True`` will raise ``TypeError: Can only append a dict if ignore_index=True``
  instead of ``TypeError: Can only append a Series if ignore_index=True or if the Series has a name`` (:issue:`30871`)
- Set operations on an object-dtype :class:`Index` now always return object-dtype results (:issue:`31401`)
- Bug in :meth:`AbstractHolidayCalendar.holidays` when no rules were defined (:issue:`31415`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_records` incorrectly losing timezone information in timezone-aware ``datetime64`` columns (:issue:`32535`)
- Fixed :func:`pandas.testing.assert_series_equal` to correctly raise if left object is a different subclass with ``check_series_type=True`` (:issue:`32670`).
- :meth:`IntegerArray.astype` now supports ``datetime64`` dtype (:issue:32538`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.contributors:

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Commit message:

Add whatsnew note about missing attributes

doc/source/whatsnew/v1.1.0.rst, after:

.. _whatsnew_110:

What's new in 1.1.0 (??)
------------------------

These are the changes in pandas 1.1.0. See :ref:`release` for a full changelog
including other versions of pandas.

{{ header }}

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_110.period_index_partial_string_slicing:

Nonmonotonic PeriodIndex Partial String Slicing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`PeriodIndex` now supports partial string slicing for non-monotonic indexes, mirroring :class:`DatetimeIndex` behavior (:issue:`31096`)

For example:

.. ipython:: python

   dti = pd.date_range("2014-01-01", periods=30, freq="30D")
   pi = dti.to_period("D")
   ser_monotonic = pd.Series(np.arange(30), index=pi)
   shuffler = list(range(0, 30, 2)) + list(range(1, 31, 2))
   ser = ser_monotonic[shuffler]
   ser

.. ipython:: python

   ser["2014"]
   ser.loc["May 2015"]

.. _whatsnew_110.timestamp_fold_support:

Fold argument support in Timestamp constructor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:class:`Timestamp:` now supports the keyword-only fold argument according to `PEP 495 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0495/#the-fold-attribute>`_ similar to parent ``datetime.datetime`` class. It supports both accepting fold as an initialization argument and inferring fold from other constructor arguments (:issue:`25057`, :issue:`31338`). Support is limited to ``dateutil`` timezones as ``pytz`` doesn't support fold.

For example:

.. ipython:: python

    ts = pd.Timestamp("2019-10-27 01:30:00+00:00")
    ts.fold

.. ipython:: python

    ts = pd.Timestamp(year=2019, month=10, day=27, hour=1, minute=30,
                      tz="dateutil/Europe/London", fold=1)
    ts

For more on working with fold, see :ref:`Fold subsection <timeseries.fold>` in the user guide.

.. _whatsnew_110.enhancements.other:

Other enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- :class:`Styler` may now render CSS more efficiently where multiple cells have the same styling (:issue:`30876`)
- :meth:`Styler.highlight_null` now accepts ``subset`` argument (:issue:`31345`)
- When writing directly to a sqlite connection :func:`to_sql` now supports the ``multi`` method (:issue:`29921`)
- `OptionError` is now exposed in `pandas.errors` (:issue:`27553`)
- :func:`timedelta_range` will now infer a frequency when passed ``start``, ``stop``, and ``periods`` (:issue:`32377`)
- Positional slicing on a :class:`IntervalIndex` now supports slices with ``step > 1`` (:issue:`31658`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.sample` will now also allow array-like and BitGenerator objects to be passed to ``random_state`` as seeds (:issue:`32503`)
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.api.other:

Other API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- :meth:`Series.describe` will now show distribution percentiles for ``datetime`` dtypes, statistics ``first`` and ``last``
  will now be ``min`` and ``max`` to match with numeric dtypes in :meth:`DataFrame.describe` (:issue:`30164`)
- Added :meth:`DataFrame.value_counts` (:issue:`5377`)
- :meth:`Groupby.groups` now returns an abbreviated representation when called on large dataframes (:issue:`1135`)
- ``loc`` lookups with an object-dtype :class:`Index` and an integer key will now raise ``KeyError`` instead of ``TypeError`` when key is missing (:issue:`31905`)
-

Backwards incompatible API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- :meth:`DataFrame.swaplevels` now raises a  ``TypeError`` if the axis is not a :class:`MultiIndex`.
  Previously a ``AttributeError`` was raised (:issue:`31126`)
- :meth:`DataFrameGroupby.mean` and :meth:`SeriesGroupby.mean` (and similarly for :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.median`, :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.std` and :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.var`)
  now raise a  ``TypeError`` if a not-accepted keyword argument is passed into it.
  Previously a ``UnsupportedFunctionCall`` was raised (``AssertionError`` if ``min_count`` passed into :meth:`~DataFrameGroupby.median`) (:issue:`31485`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.at` and :meth:`Series.at` will raise a ``TypeError`` instead of a ``ValueError`` if an incompatible key is passed, and ``KeyError`` if a missing key is passed, matching the behavior of ``.loc[]`` (:issue:`31722`)
- Passing an integer dtype other than ``int64`` to ``np.array(period_index, dtype=...)`` will now raise ``TypeError`` instead of incorrectly using ``int64`` (:issue:`32255`)
-

.. _whatsnew_110.api_breaking.indexing_raises_key_errors:

Failed Label-Based Lookups Always Raise KeyError
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Label lookups ``series[key]``, ``series.loc[key]`` and ``frame.loc[key]``
used to raises either ``KeyError`` or ``TypeError`` depending on the type of
key and type of :class:`Index`.  These now consistently raise ``KeyError`` (:issue:`31867`)

.. ipython:: python

    ser1 = pd.Series(range(3), index=[0, 1, 2])
    ser2 = pd.Series(range(3), index=pd.date_range("2020-02-01", periods=3))

*Previous behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: ser1[1.5]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on Int64Index with these indexers [1.5] of type float

    In [4] ser1["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [5]: ser1.loc[1.5]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on Int64Index with these indexers [1.5] of type float

    In [6]: ser1.loc["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [7]: ser2.loc[1]
    ...
    TypeError: cannot do label indexing on DatetimeIndex with these indexers [1] of type int

    In [8]: ser2.loc[pd.Timestamp(0)]
    ...
    KeyError: Timestamp('1970-01-01 00:00:00')

*New behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [3]: ser1[1.5]
    ...
    KeyError: 1.5

    In [4] ser1["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [5]: ser1.loc[1.5]
    ...
    KeyError: 1.5

    In [6]: ser1.loc["foo"]
    ...
    KeyError: 'foo'

    In [7]: ser2.loc[1]
    ...
    KeyError: 1

    In [8]: ser2.loc[pd.Timestamp(0)]
    ...
    KeyError: Timestamp('1970-01-01 00:00:00')

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.api_breaking.assignment_to_multiple_columns:

Assignment to multiple columns of a DataFrame when some columns do not exist
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Assignment to multiple columns of a :class:`DataFrame` when some of the columns do not exist would previously assign the values to the last column. Now, new columns would be constructed with the right values. (:issue:`13658`)

.. ipython:: python

   df = pd.DataFrame({'a': [0, 1, 2], 'b': [3, 4, 5]})
   df

*Previous behavior*:

.. code-block:: ipython

   In [3]: df[['a', 'c']] = 1
   In [4]: df
   Out[4]:
      a  b
   0  1  1
   1  1  1
   2  1  1

*New behavior*:

.. ipython:: python

   df[['a', 'c']] = 1
   df

.. _whatsnew_110.deprecations:

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Lookups on a :class:`Series` with a single-item list containing a slice (e.g. ``ser[[slice(0, 4)]]``) are deprecated, will raise in a future version.  Either convert the list to tuple, or pass the slice directly instead (:issue:`31333`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.mean` and :meth:`DataFrame.median` with ``numeric_only=None`` will include datetime64 and datetime64tz columns in a future version (:issue:`29941`)
- Setting values with ``.loc`` using a positional slice is deprecated and will raise in a future version.  Use ``.loc`` with labels or ``.iloc`` with positions instead (:issue:`31840`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.to_dict` has deprecated accepting short names for ``orient`` in future versions (:issue:`32515`)
- :meth:`Categorical.to_dense` is deprecated and will be removed in a future version, use ``np.asarray(cat)`` instead (:issue:`32639`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------


.. _whatsnew_110.performance:

Performance improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Performance improvement in :class:`Timedelta` constructor (:issue:`30543`)
- Performance improvement in :class:`Timestamp` constructor (:issue:`30543`)
- Performance improvement in flex arithmetic ops between :class:`DataFrame` and :class:`Series` with ``axis=0`` (:issue:`31296`)
- The internal index method :meth:`~Index._shallow_copy` now copies cached attributes over to the new index,
  avoiding creating these again on the new index. This can speed up many operations that depend on creating copies of
  existing indexes (:issue:`28584`, :issue:`32640`, :issue:`32669`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.bug_fixes:

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~


Categorical
^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug where :func:`merge` was unable to join on non-unique categorical indices (:issue:`28189`)
- Bug when passing categorical data to :class:`Index` constructor along with ``dtype=object`` incorrectly returning a :class:`CategoricalIndex` instead of object-dtype :class:`Index` (:issue:`32167`)
- Bug where :class:`Categorical` comparison operator ``__ne__`` would incorrectly evaluate to ``False`` when either element was missing (:issue:`32276`)
- :meth:`Categorical.fillna` now accepts :class:`Categorical` ``other`` argument (:issue:`32420`)

Datetimelike
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in :class:`Timestamp` where constructing :class:`Timestamp` from ambiguous epoch time and calling constructor again changed :meth:`Timestamp.value` property (:issue:`24329`)
- :meth:`DatetimeArray.searchsorted`, :meth:`TimedeltaArray.searchsorted`, :meth:`PeriodArray.searchsorted` not recognizing non-pandas scalars and incorrectly raising ``ValueError`` instead of ``TypeError`` (:issue:`30950`)
- Bug in :class:`Timestamp` where constructing :class:`Timestamp` with dateutil timezone less than 128 nanoseconds before daylight saving time switch from winter to summer would result in nonexistent time (:issue:`31043`)
- Bug in :meth:`Period.to_timestamp`, :meth:`Period.start_time` with microsecond frequency returning a timestamp one nanosecond earlier than the correct time (:issue:`31475`)
- :class:`Timestamp` raising confusing error message when year, month or day is missing (:issue:`31200`)
- Bug in :class:`DatetimeIndex` constructor incorrectly accepting ``bool``-dtyped inputs (:issue:`32668`)

Timedelta
^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in constructing a :class:`Timedelta` with a high precision integer that would round the :class:`Timedelta` components (:issue:`31354`)
- Bug in dividing ``np.nan`` or ``None`` by :class:`Timedelta`` incorrectly returning ``NaT`` (:issue:`31869`)
-

Timezones
^^^^^^^^^

-
-


Numeric
^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.floordiv` with ``axis=0`` not treating division-by-zero like :meth:`Series.floordiv` (:issue:`31271`)
- Bug in :meth:`to_numeric` with string argument ``"uint64"`` and ``errors="coerce"`` silently fails (:issue:`32394`)
- Bug in :meth:`to_numeric` with ``downcast="unsigned"`` fails for empty data (:issue:`32493`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.mean` with ``numeric_only=False`` and either ``datetime64`` dtype or ``PeriodDtype`` column incorrectly raising ``TypeError`` (:issue:`32426`)
-

Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :class:`Series` construction from NumPy array with big-endian ``datetime64`` dtype (:issue:`29684`)
- Bug in :class:`Timedelta` construction with large nanoseconds keyword value (:issue:`32402`)
- Bug in :class:`DataFrame` construction where sets would be duplicated rather than raising (:issue:`32582`)

Strings
^^^^^^^

-
-


Interval
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Indexing
^^^^^^^^
- Bug in slicing on a :class:`DatetimeIndex` with a partial-timestamp dropping high-resolution indices near the end of a year, quarter, or month (:issue:`31064`)
- Bug in :meth:`PeriodIndex.get_loc` treating higher-resolution strings differently from :meth:`PeriodIndex.get_value` (:issue:`31172`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.at` and :meth:`DataFrame.at` not matching ``.loc`` behavior when looking up an integer in a :class:`Float64Index` (:issue:`31329`)
- Bug in :meth:`PeriodIndex.is_monotonic` incorrectly returning ``True`` when containing leading ``NaT`` entries (:issue:`31437`)
- Bug in :meth:`DatetimeIndex.get_loc` raising ``KeyError`` with converted-integer key instead of the user-passed key (:issue:`31425`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.xs` incorrectly returning ``Timestamp`` instead of ``datetime64`` in some object-dtype cases (:issue:`31630`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.iat` incorrectly returning ``Timestamp`` instead of ``datetime`` in some object-dtype cases (:issue:`32809`)
- Bug in :meth:`Series.loc` and :meth:`DataFrame.loc` when indexing with an integer key on a object-dtype :class:`Index` that is not all-integers (:issue:`31905`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.iloc.__setitem__` on a :class:`DataFrame` with duplicate columns incorrectly setting values for all matching columns (:issue:`15686`, :issue:`22036`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.loc:` and :meth:`Series.loc` with a :class:`DatetimeIndex`, :class:`TimedeltaIndex`, or :class:`PeriodIndex` incorrectly allowing lookups of non-matching datetime-like dtypes (:issue:`32650`)

Missing
^^^^^^^

- Calling :meth:`fillna` on an empty Series now correctly returns a shallow copied object. The behaviour is now consistent with :class:`Index`, :class:`DataFrame` and a non-empty :class:`Series` (:issue:`32543`).


MultiIndex
^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`Dataframe.loc` when used with a :class:`MultiIndex`. The returned values were not in the same order as the given inputs (:issue:`22797`)

.. ipython:: python

        df = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(4),
                          index=[["a", "a", "b", "b"], [1, 2, 1, 2]])
        # Rows are now ordered as the requested keys
        df.loc[(['b', 'a'], [2, 1]), :]

- Bug in :meth:`MultiIndex.intersection` was not guaranteed to preserve order when ``sort=False``. (:issue:`31325`)

.. ipython:: python

        left = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["b", "a"], [2, 1]])
        right = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["a", "b", "c"], [1, 2, 3]])
        # Common elements are now guaranteed to be ordered by the left side
        left.intersection(right, sort=False)

-

I/O
^^^
- Bug in :meth:`read_json` where integer overflow was occuring when json contains big number strings. (:issue:`30320`)
- `read_csv` will now raise a ``ValueError`` when the arguments `header` and `prefix` both are not `None`. (:issue:`27394`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_json` was raising ``NotFoundError`` when ``path_or_buf`` was an S3 URI (:issue:`28375`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_parquet` overwriting pyarrow's default for
  ``coerce_timestamps``; following pyarrow's default allows writing nanosecond
  timestamps with ``version="2.0"`` (:issue:`31652`).
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was raising `TypeError` when `sep=None` was used in combination with `comment` keyword (:issue:`31396`)
- Bug in :class:`HDFStore` that caused it to set to ``int64`` the dtype of a ``datetime64`` column when reading a DataFrame in Python 3 from fixed format written in Python 2 (:issue:`31750`)
- :func:`read_csv` will raise a ``ValueError`` when the column names passed in `parse_dates` are missing in the Dataframe (:issue:`31251`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_excel` where a UTF-8 string with a high surrogate would cause a segmentation violation (:issue:`23809`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was causing a file descriptor leak on an empty file (:issue:`31488`)
- Bug in :meth:`read_csv` was causing a segfault when there were blank lines between the header and data rows (:issue:`28071`)


Plotting
^^^^^^^^

- :func:`.plot` for line/bar now accepts color by dictonary (:issue:`8193`).
-
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.boxplot` and :meth:`DataFrame.plot.boxplot` lost color attributes of ``medianprops``, ``whiskerprops``, ``capprops`` and ``medianprops`` (:issue:`30346`)


Groupby/resample/rolling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Bug in :meth:`GroupBy.apply` raises ``ValueError`` when the ``by`` axis is not sorted and has duplicates and the applied ``func`` does not mutate passed in objects (:issue:`30667`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrameGroupby.transform` produces incorrect result with transformation functions (:issue:`30918`)

Reshaping
^^^^^^^^^

- Bug effecting all numeric and boolean reduction methods not returning subclassed data type. (:issue:`25596`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` when only MultiIndexed columns is set (:issue:`17038`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.unstack` and :meth:`Series.unstack` can take tuple names in MultiIndexed data (:issue:`19966`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` when ``margin`` is ``True`` and only ``column`` is defined (:issue:`31016`)
- Fix incorrect error message in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot` when ``columns`` is set to ``None``. (:issue:`30924`)
- Bug in :func:`crosstab` when inputs are two Series and have tuple names, the output will keep dummy MultiIndex as columns. (:issue:`18321`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.pivot` can now take lists for ``index`` and ``columns`` arguments (:issue:`21425`)
- Bug in :func:`concat` where the resulting indices are not copied when ``copy=True`` (:issue:`29879`)
- :meth:`Series.append` will now raise a ``TypeError`` when passed a DataFrame or a sequence containing Dataframe (:issue:`31413`)
- :meth:`DataFrame.replace` and :meth:`Series.replace` will raise a ``TypeError`` if ``to_replace`` is not an expected type. Previously the ``replace`` would fail silently (:issue:`18634`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.apply` where callback was called with :class:`Series` parameter even though ``raw=True`` requested. (:issue:`32423`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.pivot_table` losing timezone information when creating a :class:`MultiIndex` level from a column with timezone-aware dtype (:issue:`32558`)


Sparse
^^^^^^
- Creating a :class:`SparseArray` from timezone-aware dtype will issue a warning before dropping timezone information, instead of doing so silently (:issue:`32501`)
-
-

ExtensionArray
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-
-


Other
^^^^^
- Appending a dictionary to a :class:`DataFrame` without passing ``ignore_index=True`` will raise ``TypeError: Can only append a dict if ignore_index=True``
  instead of ``TypeError: Can only append a Series if ignore_index=True or if the Series has a name`` (:issue:`30871`)
- Set operations on an object-dtype :class:`Index` now always return object-dtype results (:issue:`31401`)
- Bug in :meth:`AbstractHolidayCalendar.holidays` when no rules were defined (:issue:`31415`)
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.to_records` incorrectly losing timezone information in timezone-aware ``datetime64`` columns (:issue:`32535`)
- Fixed :func:`pandas.testing.assert_series_equal` to correctly raise if left object is a different subclass with ``check_series_type=True`` (:issue:`32670`).
- :meth:`IntegerArray.astype` now supports ``datetime64`` dtype (:issue:32538`)
- Getting a missing attribute in a query/eval string raises the correct ``AttributeError`` (:issue:`32408`)

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _whatsnew_110.contributors:

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
