.. _whatsnew_160:

What's new in 1.6.0 (??)
------------------------

These are the changes in pandas 1.6.0. See :ref:`release` for a full changelog
including other versions of pandas.

{{ header }}

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.enhancements:

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_160.enhancements.enhancement1:

enhancement1
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_160.enhancements.enhancement2:

enhancement2
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_160.enhancements.other:

Other enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- :meth:`Series.add_suffix`, :meth:`DataFrame.add_suffix`, :meth:`Series.add_prefix` and :meth:`DataFrame.add_prefix` support an ``axis`` argument. If ``axis`` is set, the default behaviour of which axis to consider can be overwritten (:issue:`47819`)
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.notable_bug_fixes:

Notable bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are bug fixes that might have notable behavior changes.

.. _whatsnew_160.notable_bug_fixes.notable_bug_fix1:

notable_bug_fix1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_160.notable_bug_fixes.notable_bug_fix2:

notable_bug_fix2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.api_breaking:

Backwards incompatible API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_160.api_breaking.deps:

Increased minimum versions for dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Some minimum supported versions of dependencies were updated.
If installed, we now require:

+-----------------+-----------------+----------+---------+
| Package         | Minimum Version | Required | Changed |
+=================+=================+==========+=========+
|                 |                 |    X     |    X    |
+-----------------+-----------------+----------+---------+

For `optional libraries <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/install.html>`_ the general recommendation is to use the latest version.
The following table lists the lowest version per library that is currently being tested throughout the development of pandas.
Optional libraries below the lowest tested version may still work, but are not considered supported.

+-----------------+-----------------+---------+
| Package         | Minimum Version | Changed |
+=================+=================+=========+
|                 |                 |    X    |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+

See :ref:`install.dependencies` and :ref:`install.optional_dependencies` for more.

.. _whatsnew_160.api_breaking.other:

Other API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.deprecations:

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~
-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.performance:

Performance improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.bug_fixes:

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

Categorical
^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Datetimelike
^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Timedelta
^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Timezones
^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Numeric
^^^^^^^
-
-

Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Strings
^^^^^^^
-
-

Interval
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Indexing
^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`DataFrame.reindex` filling with wrong values when indexing columns and index for ``uint`` dtypes (:issue:`48184`)
-

Missing
^^^^^^^
-
-

MultiIndex
^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`MultiIndex.append` not checking names for equality (:issue:`48288`)
-

I/O
^^^
-
-

Period
^^^^^^
-
-

Plotting
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Groupby/resample/rolling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Reshaping
^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Sparse
^^^^^^
-
-

ExtensionArray
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Styler
^^^^^^
-
-

Other
^^^^^

.. ***DO NOT USE THIS SECTION***

-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_160.contributors:

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
