.. _whatsnew_310:

What's new in 3.1.0 (Month XX, 2026)
------------------------------------

These are the changes in pandas 3.1.0. See :ref:`release` for a full changelog
including other versions of pandas.

{{ header }}

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.enhancements:

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_310.enhancements.enhancement1:

enhancement1
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_310.enhancements.enhancement2:

enhancement2
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_310.enhancements.other:

Other enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Display formatting for float sequences in DataFrame cells now respects the ``display.precision`` option (:issue:`60503`).
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.notable_bug_fixes:

Notable bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are bug fixes that might have notable behavior changes.

.. _whatsnew_310.notable_bug_fixes.notable_bug_fix1:

notable_bug_fix1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _whatsnew_310.notable_bug_fixes.notable_bug_fix2:

notable_bug_fix2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.api_breaking:

Backwards incompatible API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _whatsnew_310.api_breaking.deps:

Increased minimum versions for dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Some minimum supported versions of dependencies were updated.
If installed, we now require:

+-----------------+-----------------+----------+---------+
| Package         | Minimum Version | Required | Changed |
+=================+=================+==========+=========+
|                 |                 |    X     |    X    |
+-----------------+-----------------+----------+---------+

For `optional libraries <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/install.html>`_ the general recommendation is to use the latest version.
The following table lists the lowest version per library that is currently being tested throughout the development of pandas.
Optional libraries below the lowest tested version may still work, but are not considered supported.

+-----------------+-----------------+---------+
| Package         | Minimum Version | Changed |
+=================+=================+=========+
|                 |                 |    X    |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+

See :ref:`install.dependencies` and :ref:`install.optional_dependencies` for more.

.. _whatsnew_310.api_breaking.other:

Other API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.deprecations:

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Deprecated :meth:`.DataFrameGroupBy.agg` and :meth:`.Resampler.agg` unpacking a scalar when the provided ``func`` returns a Series or array of length 1; in the future this will result in the Series or array being in the result. Users should unpack the scalar in ``func`` itself (:issue:`64014`)
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.performance:

Performance improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Performance improvement in :meth:`DataFrame.__getitem__` when selecting a
  single column by label on a :class:`DataFrame` with duplicate column names.
  (:issue:`64126`).
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.bug_fixes:

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

Categorical
^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Datetimelike
^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Timedelta
^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Timezones
^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Numeric
^^^^^^^
- Fixed bug in :meth:`Series.clip` where passing a scalar numpy array (e.g. ``np.array(0)``) would raise a ``TypeError`` (:issue:`59053`)
-

Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Strings
^^^^^^^
-
-

Interval
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Indexing
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Missing
^^^^^^^
-
-

MultiIndex
^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

I/O
^^^
- Fixed bug in :func:`read_excel` where usage of ``skiprows`` could lead to an infinite loop (:issue:`64027`)
-

Period
^^^^^^
-
-

Plotting
^^^^^^^^
-
-

Groupby/resample/rolling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Bug in :meth:`.DataFrameGroupBy.agg` when there are no groups, multiple keys, and ``group_keys=False`` (:issue:`51445`)
- Bug in :meth:`.DataFrameGroupBy.agg` would operate on the group as a whole when ``args`` or ``kwargs`` are supplied for the provided ``func``; now this method only operates on each Series of the group (:issue:`39169`)

Reshaping
^^^^^^^^^
- In :func:`pivot_table`, when ``values`` is empty, the aggregation will be computed on a Series of all NA values (:issue:`46475`)
-

Sparse
^^^^^^
-
-

ExtensionArray
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
-
-

Styler
^^^^^^
-
-

Other
^^^^^

.. ***DO NOT USE THIS SECTION***

-
-

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_310.contributors:

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
